DOCS-2640 SAML Troubleshooting Guide (#11398)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/account_management/saml/troubleshooting.md

## Common errors

If you come across an error message such as `Arf. Unknown User`, `There are No Authn Mappings for this User`, `Assertion could not be validated`, `SAML NO HANDLE ERROR`, or `No active account for a user`, there may be an issue with your mappings configuration in Datadog or in your identity provider (IdP) configuration. See the error below to resolve.

### There are no authn mappings for this user

There is a mismatch with your mappings configuration in Datadog and your configuration in your IdP. See [Roles errors](#roles-errors).

### Assertion could not be validated

After enabling IdP initiated login in Datadog, the [Assertion Consumer Service (ACS) URLs][1] in your IdP configuration may be incorrect. Alternatively, your assertions may be unsigned. For more information, see [Assertions and attributes][2].

### SAML no handle error

Your assertion may be missing the required `eduPersonPrincipalName` attribute. Confirm that this attribute is set in your configuration. For more information, see [Assertions and attributes][2].

### No active account for a user

> Enabling JIT provisioning may result in the `There is no active account for` error if a user has not received an email invitation or if their account is disabled in [User settings][3]. To resolve, follow the steps below based on your scenario:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enabling Just-In-Time (JIT) provisioning may result in the `There is no active account for` error if a user has not received an email invitation or if their account is disabled in [User settings][3]. To resolve, follow the steps below based on your scenario:
```

>   - If a new Datadog user tries to log into a Datadog org without an email invitation and the `There is no active account for error` occurs, send the user an email invitation and check if JIT provisioning is enabled for your org. The user **must** accept the invitation to enable JIT provisioning. Once the invitation is sent, the user exists in the system and cannot use JIT provisioning until the invite is accepted. If a user needs to verify their email or the invitation is expired, have the admin send a new invitation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - If a new Datadog user tries to log in to a Datadog organization without an email invitation and the `There is no active account for error` occurs, send the user an email invitation and check if JIT provisioning is enabled for your organization. The user **must** accept the invitation to enable JIT provisioning. Once the invitation is sent, the user exists in the system and cannot use JIT provisioning until the invite is accepted. If a user needs to verify their email or the invitation is expired, have the admin send a new invitation.
```

>   - If a user is no longer enabled in a Datadog organization that has JIT provisioning enabled and they try to login again through SAML and the `There is no active account for error` occurs, re-enable the user in [User settings][3].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - If a user is no longer enabled in a Datadog organization that has JIT provisioning enabled and they try to log in again through SAML and the `There is no active account for error` occurs, re-enable the user in [User settings][3].
```

## IdP metadata file errors

If you are having trouble updating your IdP metadata file, verify that the metadata file you are trying to upload is valid.

To validate your metadata file:

1. Choose a SAML validation tool, such as the [SAML developer tool][4] by OneLogin.
2. Paste your metadata into the XML field and select **Metadata** in the XSD (schema file) field.
3. Click **Validate XML With the XSD Schema**.

## Roles errors

> When mappings are enabled, users logging in with SAML to a Datadog account are stripped of their current roles and reassigned to new roles based on the details in their SAML assertion passed on from your Identity Provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When mappings are enabled, users logging in with SAML to a Datadog account are stripped of their current roles and reassigned to new roles based on the details in their SAML assertion passed on from your IdP.
```

Users who log in with SAML and do not have the values that map to a Datadog role are stripped of all roles and are not allowed to log in.

{{< img src="account_management/saml/unknown_user_error.png" alt="No AuthNMappings for this user" style="width:80%;">}}

If you have group mappings set and are not able to see your roles, your group mappings in the Datadog application may appear differently in your IdP. To verify:

1. Retrieve your IdP's SAML assertion for your account. Use browser tooling, such as [extensions][5], to retrieve your SAML assertion. For example:

  ```xml
  <saml2:Attribute Name="member_of"
                             NameFormat="urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:attrname-format:unspecified"
                             >
                <saml2:AttributeValue xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"
                                      xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
                                      xsi:type="xs:string"
                                      >name_of_your_group_goes_here</saml2:AttributeValue>
  </saml2:Attribute>
  ```

> 2. Navigate to the Team page in the bottom left corner of Datadog.

Reviewer: The "Team" page no longer exists! These instructions need updating and verification.

> 2. Navigate to the Team page in the bottom left corner of Datadog.
> 3. Select the [**Mappings**][6] tab.
> 4. Compare the attributes provided by your IdP in your SAML assertion to the attributes set in the [**Mappings**][6] tab.
> 
>   {{< img src="account_management/saml/saml_mappings_example.png" alt="SAML mappings in Datadog" style="width:80%;">}}
> 
> 5. Resolve any discrepancies in either the Datadog Mappings settings, or within your IdP settings. For example, if `memberof` is a set attribute in Datadog, and it's `member_Of` in your SAML assertion, resolve accordingly.

Author: ```suggestion
2. Navigate to your profile and select **Organization Settings** in the bottom left corner of Datadog.
3. Select [**SAML Group Mappings**][6].
4. Compare the attributes provided by your IdP in your SAML assertion to the attributes set in the [**SAML Group Mappings**][6] tab.

  {{< img src="account_management/saml/saml_mappings_example.png" alt="SAML mappings in Datadog" style="width:80%;">}}

5. Resolve any discrepancies in either the Datadog SAML Group Mappings settings, or within your IdP settings. For example, if `memberof` is a set attribute in Datadog, and it's `member_Of` in your SAML assertion, resolve accordingly.
```

> Discrepancies may occur when there is no match or a mismatch between the attribute key and value. For example, if you see a key value pair of `memberOf` and `name_of_your_group_goes_here` in **Mappings**, you run into an issue because this pair is not included in the assertion sent over from your IdP.

Author: ```suggestion
Discrepancies may occur when there is no match or a mismatch between the attribute key and value. For example, if you see a key value pair of `memberOf` and `name_of_your_group_goes_here` in **SAML Group Mappings**, you run into an issue because this pair is not included in the assertion sent over from your IdP.
```

If you are having trouble logging in because of a role-based error, contact your Administrator to complete the troubleshooting steps above.

**Notes**:

- Each IdP provides different types of attributes, and different ways to set attributes. For example, Azure uses [object IDs][7] for their attribute, or if you're using Okta, you must set attributes in [Okta settings][8]. Reference your IdP's attribute documentation for information.

> - When you disable Mappings, users are allowed to login with SAML and have the same roles they are assigned to—even if the group membership changed in your IdP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When you disable Mappings, users are allowed to log in with SAML and have the same roles they are assigned to—even if the group membership changed in your IdP.
```

## Identity provider (IdP) errors

If you encounter an error coming from your IdP such as Google, Active Directory, Azure, LastPass, Okta, and more:

- If you encounter an issue in Google's Admin Console, see [SAML app error messages][9].
- If you encounter an issue in Active Directory, see [Debug SAML-based single sign-on to applications in Azure Active Directory][10].
- If you encounter an issue in AuthO, see [Troubleshoot SAML Configurations][11].
- If you encounter an issue in Azure, see [An app page shows an error message after the user signs in][12].
- If you encounter an issue in Google, see [Datadog cloud application][13].
- If you encounter an issue in LastPass, see the [Datadog App Integration][14].
- If you encounter an issue in Okta, see [Receiving 404 error when attempting to sign into application][15].
- If you encounter an issue in SafeNet, see [SafeNet Trusted Access for Datadog][16].

### Identity provider certificates

> If you are unable to login to your account, an IdP certificate may have expired and rotated, prompting a general SAML error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are unable to log in to your account, an IdP certificate may have expired and rotated, prompting a general SAML error.
```

Some questions to ask yourself that can help narrow down whether you have a certificate issue:

- Are you the only account that is unable to log in? If the issue involves multiple accounts, it could be that an IdP-based certificate has expired or rotated.
- Did anything recently change in your SAML configuration?

> - If your users are using multiple IdPs, are you seeing issues persists across multiple IdPs, or only one?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If your users are using multiple IdPs, are the issues persisting across multiple IdPs, or only one?
```

> - Did you recently enable [Mappings](#roles-errors)?

Author: ```suggestion
- Did you recently enable [**SAML Group Mappings**](#roles-errors)?
```

To resolve, ensure IdP certificates are up-to-date within your IdP's settings and that you have uploaded the most recent metadata file from your IdP in Datadog.

## Support

If you are still having trouble logging into Datadog, contact [Datadog support][17].

In your message, provide a screen recording of your login process and include responses to the following questions:

> - Are you the only account that is unable to login or are all users unable to login?
> - Which organization are you trying to login to and how are you trying to login?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Are you the only account that is unable to log in or are all users unable to log in?
- Which organization are you trying to log in to and how are you trying to log in?
```

---
title: SAML Troubleshooting
kind: documentation
description: Troubleshoot SAML issues for your Datadog account
further_reading:
- link: "https://www.samltool.com/online_tools.php"
  tag: "Developer Tools"
  text: "Identify your assertions with developer SAML tools"

---

## Overview

This page provides troubleshooting instructions for common errors during Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) authentication.

## IdP metadata file errors

If you are having trouble with updating your IdP metadata file, it is recommended to verify that the metadata file you are trying to upload is valid.

To validate your metadata file:

1. Choose a SAML validation tool, such as the [SAML developer tool][1] by OneLogin.
2. Paste your metadata into the XML field and select **Metadata** in the XSD (schema file) field.
3. Click **Validate XML With the XSD Schema**.

## Roles errors

> When mappings are enabled, users logging in with SAML to a Datadog account will be stripped of their current roles and reassigned to new roles based on the details in their SAML assertion passed on from your Identity Provider, and the mappings set within Mappings settings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When mappings are enabled, users logging in with SAML to a Datadog account are stripped of their current roles and reassigned to new roles based on the details in their SAML assertion passed on from your Identity Provider, and the mappings set within Mappings settings.
```

> Users who log in with SAML and do not have the values that map to a Datadog role will be stripped of all roles and will not be allowed to log in.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users who log in with SAML and do not have the values that map to a Datadog role are stripped of all roles and will not be allowed to log in.
```

If you have group mappings set and are not able to see your roles, you group mappings in the Datadog application may appear differently in your IdP. To verify:

1. Retrieve your IdP's SAML assertion for your account. Use browser tooling, such as [extensions][6], to retrieve your SAML assertion.

> 2. Navigate to the Team page in the bottom left corner of the Datadog app.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Navigate to the Team page in the bottom left corner of Datadog.
```

> 3. Select the **Mappings** tab.

Reviewer 3: Can we add a link to the mappings tab here as well as screenshots?

Author: I added a link to the in-app page: https://ddstaging.datadoghq.com/organization-settings/mappings. Do you have an example screenshot we can add to this section? 🙏🏼

Reviewer 3: I don't, best thing to do would be to navigate to the page and take a screenshot that fits standards for docs team.

4. Compare the attributes provided by your IdP in your SAML assertion to the attributes set in the **Mappings** tab.

> 5. Resolve any discrepencies in either the Datadog Mappings settings, or within your IdP settings.

Reviewer 3: can we provide an example of what the discrepancies may look like? Example internal documentation of what those errors look like can be found here: https://datadoghq.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/TS/pages/1248854720/Troubleshooting+issues+with+Authn+Mapping#Step-3%3A-Compare-these-attribute-key-value-pairs-to-their-mappings-page-in-Datadog

Author: Great spelling catch 👍

> If you are having trouble logging in because of a role-based error, contact your Administrator to complete the troubleshooting steps above.

Reviewer 3: Can we show what those errors look like? Here is an example: blob:https://datadoghq.atlassian.net/83e9cb85-c1c5-4e59-836e-c49e01680ed6#media-blob-url=true&id=100bd006-d99d-4520-bbb9-d6ed6dab9712&contextId=1248854720&collection=contentId-1248854720

Author: @vibrantlife I'm getting a 404 dead link error on this page?

![Screen Shot 2021-09-30 at 5 29 56 PM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/76412946/135548010-c7309e74-e014-4e14-9f0f-9e4d82d3f65a.png)

Reviewer 3: Oops. Try this blob:https://datadoghq.atlassian.net/3b2f91cb-484f-468f-bee5-819feff7367f#media-blob-url=true&id=100bd006-d99d-4520-bbb9-d6ed6dab9712&contextId=1248854720&collection=contentId-1248854720

Author: I'm still getting the same 404 error 😅

![Screen Shot 2021-10-01 at 5 32 32 PM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/76412946/135698040-4e06b682-8106-42e4-9847-d0fa8aebad02.png)

**Notes**: 

- Each IdP provides different types of attributes, and different ways to set attributes. For example, Azure uses [object IDs][7] for their attribute, or if you're using Okta, you must set attributes in [Okta settings][8]. Reference your IdP's attribute documentation for information.

- When you disable Mappings, users are allowed to login with SAML and have the same roles they are assigned to—even if the group membership changed in your IdP.

## Identity provider errors

> 

Reviewer 3: Can we be more explicit here by saying something like: "If you encounter an error that comes from your idp" rather than errors that are Datadog errors ie:`Arf.`

Author: Definitely—and are there additional IdPs we can add to the list?

Reviewer 3: All of the idps we have documentation for would be a good start. You can see them under account management: https://docs.datadoghq.com/account_management/saml/

- If you encounter an issue in Google's Admin Console, see [SAML app error messages][2].
- If you encounter an issue in Active Directory, see [Debug SAML-based single sign-on to applications in Azure Active Directory][3].
- If you encounter an issue in Azure, see [An app page shows an error message after the user signs in][4].
- If you encounter an issue in LastPass, see the [Datadog App Integration][5].

> ### Identity Provider certificates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Identity provider certificates
```

If you are unable to login to your account, an IdP certificate may have expired and rotated, prompting a general SAML error. 

Some questions to ask yourself that can help narrow down whether you have a certificate issue:

- Are you the only account that is unable to log in? If the issue involves multiple accounts, it could be that an IdP-based certificate has expired or rotated.
- Did anything recently change in your SAML configuration?
- If your users are using multiple IdPs, are you seeing issues persists across multiple IdPs, or only one?
- Did you recently enable [Mappings](#roles-errors)?

> 

Reviewer 3: Can we add a section like: common errors and how to resolve them? I would love to see the error actually displayed as well. 
- `There are No Authn Mappings for this User` is an error that is commonly reported: https://datadoghq.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/TS/pages/1248854720/Troubleshooting+issues+with+Authn+Mapping 
- `Assertion could not be validated` is another common error. This could be almost anything, but we've narrowed it down to a few solutions: https://datadoghq.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/TS/pages/533332085/Solutions+Guide+to+Troubleshooting+Authentication+Issues#Assertion-could-not-be-validated:-SAML_GENERIC_ERROR 
- `SAML NO HANDLE ERROR`: https://datadoghq.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/TS/pages/533332085/Solutions+Guide+to+Troubleshooting+Authentication+Issues#Assertion-is-missing-eduPersonPrincipalName%3A-SAML_NO_HANDLE_ERROR
- `No active user` https://datadoghq.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/TS/pages/533332085/Solutions+Guide+to+Troubleshooting+Authentication+Issues#There-is-no-active-account-for-%7B0%7D-at-the-org-with-id-%7B1%7D%3A-SAML_NO_ACTIVE_USER
-

Author: I created a section called **Common errors** and included three of the four common errors. For the `No active user` entry, do we have a simplified description about these four scenarios?

Reviewer 3: No, that error is a result of many scenarios as described. The errors displayed don't have a 1:1 solution unfortunately.

Reviewer 3: I think we should link the `No Authn Mappings` bullet to the `role errors` section.

## Support

> If you are still experiencing errors regarding your SAML assertions or are having trouble logging into Datadog, contact [Datadog support][9].

Reviewer 3: SAML assertions doesn't make sense here. If you are still having trouble logging into Datadog, contact Datadog support would be more clear.

Reviewer 3: Can we ask that when they reach out to support they include specific information: 
- Are all users having this problem or just a single user
- Which organization are you logging into and how 
- Provide a screen recording of your login process 

These questions help expedite the triage process and help us unblock customers faster. This is information we request SEs gather from customers when asking for help with login issues: https://datadoghq.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/TS/pages/504037551/Information+needed+for+troubleshooting+and+asking+for+help+with+login+issues

> If you are still experiencing errors regarding your SAML assertions or are having trouble logging into the Datadog app, contact [Datadog support][9].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are still experiencing errors regarding your SAML assertions or are having trouble logging into Datadog, contact [Datadog support][9].
```
